
Page
1
of 2
Problem Set 1, Fall 2025
Problem 1. (6 card poker hand)
You can easily look up the probability of 5 card poker hands, e.g. https://en.wikipedia.
org/wiki/Poker_probability
For this problem, let’s consider hands with 6 cards. Here are two types:
Two-pair: Two cards have one rank, two cards have another rank, and the
remaining two cards have two different ranks. e.g. 2 ♦, 2 ♣, 5♦, 5 ♦ , Q ♥, K ♦
Three-of-a-kind: Three cards have one rank and the remaining three cards
have three other ranks. e.g. 2 ♦ , 2 ♣ , 2♥, 5♦ , 9 ♦ , K ♦
Calculate the probability of each type of hand. Which is more probable?
Problem 2. (Irregular dice)
Condider 3 dice with different colors with 6 faces however the numbers of the
dice are as follows
Blue: 333336; Orange: 144444; White: 222555.
(a) Find the probability that white beats orange, the probability that orange
beats blue and the probability that blue beats white.
Can you line the dice up in order from best to worst? (Hint: this is why
these are called ’non-transitive’.)
(b) Suppose you roll two white dice against two blue dice. What is the prob-
ability that the sum of the white dice is greater than the sum of the blue dice?
Problem 3. (Birthdays: counting and simulation)
Ignoring leap days, the days of the year can be numbered 1 to 365 . Assume
that birthdays are equally likely to fall on any day of the year. Consider a group
of n people, of which you are not a member. An element of the sample space S
will be a sequence of n birthdays (one for each person).
(a) Define the probability function P for S. (This will depend on n.)
(b) Consider the following events:
A: "someone in the group shares your birthday"
B: "some two people in the group share a birthday"
C: "some three people in the group share a birthday"
Carefully describe the subset of S that corresponds to each event.
(c) Find an exact formula for P (A). What is the smallest n such that
P (A) > 0.5 ?
(d) Justify why n in part (c) is greater than 365
2 without doing any compu-
tation. (We are looking for a short answer giving a heuristic sense of why this
1
is so.)
(e) Use simulation to estimate the smallest n for which P (B) > 0.9. For
these simulations, let the number of trials be 10000. (see attache R simulation
file.)
For this value of n, repeat the simulation a few times to verify that it always
gives similar results.
Using 10000 trials you saw very little variation in the estimate of P (B). Try
this again using 30 trials and verify that the estimated probabilities are much
more variable. On your pset, give the results 7 runs of 30 trials using the value
of n you just found.
(f) Find an exact formula for P (B).
(g) Use simulation to estimate the smallest n for which P (C) > 0.5. Again
use 10000 trials. You will find that two adjacent values of n are equally plausible
based on simulations. You may pick either one for your answer.
Note that it is much harder to find an exact formula for P (C), so simulation is
especially handy.
Problem 4 If two balanced dice are rolled, what is the probability that the
difference between the two numbers that appear will be less than 3?
Problem 5 A school contains students in grades 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, and 6. Grades
2, 3, 4, 5, and 6 all contain the same number of students, but there are twice
this number in grade 1. What is the probability that the selected student will
be in an odd-numbered grade?
Problem 6 If three fair coins are tossed, what is the probability that all three
faces will be the same?
Problem 7 An elevator in a building starts with five passengers and stops at
seven floors. If every passenger is equally likely to get off at each floor and all
the passengers leave independently of each other, what is the probability that
no two passengers will get off at the same floor?
Problem 8 A box contains 100 balls, of which r are red. Suppose that the
balls are drawn from the box one at a time, at random, without replacement.
Determine (a) the probability that the first ball drawn will be red; (b) the
probability that the 50th ball drawn will be red; and (c) the probability that
the last ball drawn will be red
2
